# Dataset Bioactivities

Project exam for the course Artificial Intelligence (Lab) at unipr. Purpose of the official project is to create a dataset of bioactivities between molecules and protein targets, learning when a molecule is active or inactive.

One step of the pipeline consists in the embedding of the spectra of molecules, used to compute the similarity between them.

This repository explores some of the possible ways to compute the similarity between molecules.

## Usage

To run the notebooks, you need to install the following libraries:

- matchms (0.9.1)
- spec2vec (0.5.0)
- pandas, numpy, pickle, matplotlib, sklearn

## 1) "bioactivities" folder (not tracked)

Contains the list of bioactivities between molecules and protein targets.
Source: Papyrus (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9824924/)

**Identifiers**

- **bioactivity**: `Activity_ID`
- **molecules**: `InChIKey`
- **proteins**: `target_id`
- **bioactivity value**: `pChembl Mean/Median`

**Common heuristic thresholds**

- `pChembl < 5.0`: inactive
- `5.0 <= pChembl < 6.0`: borderline
- `pChembl >= 6.0`: active

> Note: Often `pChembl > 5.5` is considered active and `<= 5.5` inactive; this is heuristic. 
> It is more accepted to provide false positives that false negatives.

## 2) "mass_spectra_embeddings" folder (not tracked)

Contains molecule embeddings obtained with the **Spec2Vec** Python tool.
Source: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008724

Files:

- `ALL_GNPS_negative_ionization_DATASET.csv` — dataset of molecule embeddings generated by Spec2Vec from mass spectra.
- `Pairwise_similarity_scores.tsv` — quality metrics for Spec2Vec embeddings using cosine similarity.
- `spec2vec_vs_baseline.png` — plot of embedding quality metrics for inter- and intra-similarity using cosine similarity.

## 3) "protein_embeddings" folder (not tracked)

Contains protein embeddings obtained with **UniRep**.
Source: Papyrus (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9824924/)

There are three files, each containing a representation of proteins using embeddings of different dimensionalities:

| File | Description |
|---|---|
| `protein_embeddings_UniRep64.csv` | embeddings composed of 3 components of 64 features/columns each (total 192 features) |
| `protein_embeddings_UniRep256.csv` | embeddings composed of 3 components of 256 features/columns each (total 768 features) |
| `protein_embeddings_UniRep1900.csv` | embeddings composed of 3 components of 1900 features/columns each (total 5700 features) |

## 4. "doc" folder (not tracked)
Contains the papers from which the notebooks were inspired. Citations can be found in bibliography section and in the notebooks.

## 5) "src" folder

### Spectral Analysis

This folder contains the notebooks, models and data used in the project.

The "data" sub folder (not tracked) contains tabular files used in spec2vec paper. The data are tandem mass spectroscopy results, with _m/z_ and _intensity_ informations.

To retreive spectral data (m/z, intensities) of fragmented molecules, please refer to the databases at the page https://external.gnps2.org/gnpslibrary or the following link https://zenodo.org/records/3979010.

Alternatives:
1. Cosine similarity (overlaps m/z axe and compare intensities)
2. spec2vec (learn semantic similarity of the spectra)
3. Earth mover distance (compute cost for moving between distributions)
4. Gaussian kernel (compute cost for moving between distributions)

##

The pipelines are inspired by the Spec2Vec authors Medium articles that can be found at https://blog.esciencecenter.nl/build-your-own-mass-spectrometry-analysis-pipeline-in-python-using-matchms-part-i-d96c718c68ee and by the github repository https://github.com/iomega/spec2vec_gnps_data_analysis/

##

### Bibliography

[1] WANG, Mingxun, et al. Sharing and community curation of mass spectrometry data with Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking. Nature biotechnology, 2016, 34.8: 828-837.

[2] CIACH, Michał Aleksander, et al. Masserstein: Linear regression of mass spectra by optimal transport. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 2025, 39: e8956.

[3] BEQUIGNON, Olivier JM, et al. Papyrus: a large-scale curated dataset aimed at bioactivity predictions. Journal of cheminformatics, 2023, 15.1: 3.

[4] HUBER, Florian, et al. Spec2Vec: Improved mass spectral similarity scoring through learning of structural relationships. PLoS computational biology, 2021, 17.2: e1008724.

[5] MAJEWSKI, Szymon, et al. The Wasserstein distance as a dissimilarity measure for mass spectra with application to spectral deconvolution. In: 18th International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics (WABI 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018. p. 25: 1-25: 21.